### *In life, as in art, the beautiful moves in curves*

## Definition

In $\mathbb{R}^n$ a cuve is a differentiable map $\bf{\psi}: I \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^n$  where $I$ is an **open** set $I \subset \mathbb{R}$.

This doesn't tell us much in terms of inuition though not much is needed in this case as a curve is a concept that we all are at least vaguely familiar with. The only thing that surprises us is that $\bf{\psi}$ must be "well-behaved" in the terms that it must be differentiable (so zig-zags are not curves under this definition) and that it must be defined for an open set. 
The openness of $I$ won't bother us too much for curves though it will allow us to make our lifes a bit easier without needing to account for the bounds of the interval. A bit later when examining surfaces, we will get a taste of why it is a good idea to *avoid* open intervals.

## Parametarization

Let's get an idea though of what it means for the map $\psi$ to be differentiable. The domain of $\bf{\psi}$ is an open subset of the real numbers as mentioned above and it maps to $\mathbb{R}^n$ so we have for $t \in I,$ $\bf{\psi}(t) = (f_1(t), f_2(t), ..., f_n(t))$ and $f_i$ shall all be differentiable maps. The choice of the mapping is called the **parametarization** of a curve. 

It should be fairly obvious that different curves shall give different parametarizations. Think of the circle - can you think of at least *two* parametarizations?

A parametarization where $\frac{\partial\bf{\psi}}{\partial t}(t_0) \neq \bf{0}$ is called **regular**.



## Example in $\mathbb{R}^2$

We start off with a fairly exotic curve called cochleoid whose coordinates satisfy the equation 

$$(x^2 + y^2)\ \text{Arctan}(y/x) = ay$$
This is hard to understand in Cartesian coordinates but if we use spherical ones and let $x = r\ \text{Cos}\theta, y = r\ \text{Sin}\theta$ we get something that is somewhat simpler to understand

$$r = a \frac{Sin(\theta)}{\theta}$$
So we could see that the radius $r$ is decreasing as the angle $\theta$ increases. We can also see that $a\ \text{Sin}(\theta)$ is periodic but when dividing with the angle $\theta$, wec can assume that the resulting image will resemble a spiral-like shape. Finally we can see that there is symmetry since $a \frac{\text{Sin}(\theta)}{\theta} =  - \frac{\text{Sin}(-\theta)}{-\theta}$

You can verify by simple substitution that $\psi(t) = (\frac{\text{Sin}(t)\text{Cos}(t)}{t}, \frac{\text{Sin}(t)^2}{t})$ is a possible parametarization for the curve for $t \in \mathbb{R}$. Is this differentiable? What happens as $t$ goes to 0? 

```sage
t = var('t')
parametric_plot((sin(t)*cos(t)/t, sin(t)^2/t), (t, -10*2*pi, 10*2*pi))
```


**Next:** [[1.2 Arc Length Parametarizations]]